Tab key navigation, another pattern.
So a question I get a lot is
when to use the arrow keys when
you're creating accessible
user interfaces.
So we use the Tab key for links,
buttons, form controls, etc.
I think there's a temptation, and
I guess we skipped down the page.
There is a temptation to use
the arrow keys for things like menus.
And on websites,
it's usually not necessary.
So there are your menu rules,
that is an ARIA rule that you can use.
There's a lot of components
that have to go into it,
including wiring up Javascript
to work on arrow keys.
We tend to only recommend
that ARIA menu for
really app-like kind of
a desktop style app menu.
So if you're just writing a header for
a website with lists of links,
you don't need all of that.
You can just keep it simple,
let things navigate in their
normal tab order with the Tab key.
Just use lists of links,
let them have their normal roles.
Don't even bother with ARIA role menu,
cuz often people sap ARIA role menu and
then they don't do the rest of
the pattern, and it's a lot of work.
So yeah, it's another ARIA pitfall.
But areas where we do
want Tab key navigation,
we can make it happen using tabindex.
So we learned about tabindex so
far, it takes different values.
So tabindex of 0 will put something in
the tab order when it wasn't already.
If it has positive values like 1,
5, 32,000,
[LAUGH] I've seen that before,
that will put it in an ordered tab order.
And it's tough, cuz you have to
manage all of those numbers.
So just use 0, everything will go
in the order that it is in the DOM.
That -1 will pull a link or
a button out of the tab order that was,
otherwise, reachable.
Or it'll add the ability to
script focus like we saw with
the wrapper element
technique on the skip links.
So tabindex is how we make
Tab key navigation work, and
I'll show you what I mean.
If I scroll down here to an example,
we have this little tabs switcher.
So I hit Tab, only one of these tabs
is actually reachable with the Tab key.
Instead, if I use the arrow keys on
these tabs, it can cycle through.
And so that's what we mean when we say,
Tab key navigation.
And so this example, this is an example
from the ARIA Authoring Practices Guide.
So it's really down to basics
showing you with HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript how to make
an accessible tab switcher.
But like I was saying for
lists of links, it would be overkill, or
we just don't need to implement
something that robust for menus.
Usually, if it's a web app,
maybe it would be more appropriate.
So to make this happen, let's make this.
I guess Stack Blitz won't get any bigger.
So for their implementation,
we have the ARIA roles for a tab list.
These buttons are reachable by default, so
they're focusable just like any
button until you put tabindex of -1.
So this uses a technique
that's called roving tabindex,
where only one button in
a set has tabindex of 0.
And every other one you set to the -1,
so that's how we could see.
Let's do this.
So each one of these, before you load
the JavaScript, these are all reachable.
But JavaScript goes in,
I guess it depends on how they wrote this.
But the tabindex of -1 on each
one of these will mean that you
have to use JavaScript to move
focus around, so it's dynamic.
Other patterns that this would
be useful for are date pickers.
If you have a calendar,
you don't wanna tab through 30 days.
[LAUGH] That'd be so annoying.
So we'd use this technique for when we
want one tab stop for a calendar, for
example, and the arrow keys will
navigate you through all these items.
So the tabindex is really the workhorse
here of making this work and
JavaScript and probably some CSS.
But what I'm saying is that
tabindex is really powerful, and
so we can make these interactive
widgets with some scripting.
And so I like these
ARIA Authoring Practices Guide examples,
cuz they do sort of strip away some of
the other things that we see in web apps,
like Typescript, and state,
and all those things.
So the alternative to some of that code,
and let's go over here and
see what their script looks like,
cuz this uses just vanilla JavaScript.
So they iterate through the tabs,
this uses DOM APIs
like querySelectorAll
instead of using JSX and
React, keeps track of
which tabs are active.
There are some event listeners for
clicking and for key down,
so you can use both, and
then setting the selected tab.
So this is kind of the alternative
to what JSX and React does for us.
A lot is that we don't have to go in and
remove attributes manually.
It makes it really easy to state
right there in your template, but
a lot of the JavaScript to do this kind of
accessibility stuff without a framework.
It's totally doable,
it's just a little bit more verbose.
And so the components of this are keeping
track of which tab needs to be selected.
Here's where the tabindex
is getting changed.
They're also changing aria-selected, so
that the state of it updates true or
false, setting and removing of attributes,
and this also moves focus.
So talking about roving tabindex, right,
so only one of these is focusable.
I can iterate through here and
change all those attributes, but
I also have to move focus there.
So that's part of this pattern,
is you change the tabindex on it and
then you set focus on to that element.
And so
this type of pattern you'll see a lot when
you get into these types of widgets.
And so here's the event handlers.
We have an on key down that watches for
the arrow keys, and
that's how it selects what tabs, kind of
depending on where we are in the order.
And the click event is
a little bit simpler,
cuz you just click on the one you want.
But with arrow keys,
we have to actually figure out,
well, where are you in the list?
What's gonna happen to the right,
what's gonna happen to the left, and
all that sort of stuff.
And some of this, we still do in React.
You still have to listen for
the key events,
you still have to keep track
of which ones are current.
We were doing a lot of that
in our examples earlier.
But with this, we are manually setting and
removing attributes instead of just
changing state variables
like we were in React.
Okay, so Tab keys versus the arrow keys.
And I think the ARIA Authoring
Practices Guide do a really good job of
talking about some of the expected
keyboard navigation conventions.
So you can read up on those
if there's other patterns.
If you're like, man, this pattern we're
working on looks an awful lot like this
one in the ARIA Authoring Practices Guide,
you could go and
see is there some part of those
conventions that you could incorporate?
I do have to say though,
do you really need the arrow keys?
Probably not.
[LAUGH] Sort of touched on that, but
I have a screenshot from Costco,
they have a big mega menu and
they just let it be lists of links.
So they didn't go for the whole ARIA menu
role thing, I think it works pretty well.
But you can look at any
major e-commerce site and
kind of see what approach
should they take.
And some sites put a lot more effort
into accessibility than others.
[LAUGH] But it's still fascinating to see
what's out there, what are teams doing?
What would i work on?
What would I love to fix
if I worked on that team?
That's kind of an interesting
thought process.
Okay, active element, so
when we are managing focus,
we have a really helpful DOM API
called the active element API.
This will tell you which element
is focused at any given time, and
sometimes it can be
hard to tell otherwise.
If you're debugging focus in a lot of
components, maybe there's some that
were meant for mobile but they are not
actually hidden and you just can't
figure out where your focus is cuz it's
in a weird state, I have a tool for you.
So this bit of code, this listener,
document.body.addEventListener("focusin",
you can add one listener on the body.
And then any element that's
focused inside of it,
you can log to the console
using document.activeElement.
So let's do that real quick.
Let's do it on, Let's see,
maybe just this site.
So I'm gonna open up the console,
and I use this frequently.
So I'm gonna hit Paste,
maybe there's a bookmarker or something,
you could do the same thing.
But with the console open still,
I'm gonna hit Tab and
it will tell me, it will log every
element that I'm tabbing on.
And if it's going through things that
are behind a modal or in a layer you can't
see, you're gonna get your answer
pretty quickly of where your focus was.
So that can be just in your bag of
tricks of debugging techniques.
Being able to log the active
element is really helpful.
It's also helpful If you need
to restore focus somewhere.
If you open a modal layer and
you're writing the code to make that work,
you can store what the user's focus
was on before they took the action.
You can store that in a variable, and then
you can send them back to the same place.
So the activeElement API is kind of
the mechanism to keep track of where
the user's focus was, or your focus in the
event of the debugging we just looked up.
And so don't forget visual focus styles,
kind of when we're talking about
activeElements and trying to figure
out which elements are focused using
skipped links and targets and all that.
Visual focus outlines are super important.
And so
when we're debugging with activeElement,
that's one area where it can be
kind of useful is to surface.
Well, is there an element that I'm
focused on that I just can't see for
whatever reason?
Maybe it's you just don't know
where you are on the screen,
cuz things are positioned in a weird
way and it doesn't have a focus style.
That can be one pathway to
figuring out how to fix it,
cuz sometimes it might end
up in a weird tab order for
some reason and just tabbing
through the page isn't enough.
That's where this DOM API,
it's just one of those tools
that you might need someday.